# gr-nlp-toolkit

A Transformer-based natural language processing toolkit for (modern) Greek. The toolkit has state-of-the art performance in Greek and supports named entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging, morphological tagging, as well as dependency parsing. Additionally, the toolkit can convert Greeklish text (Greek written using Latin characters) into standard Greek

## Installation

You can install the toolkit by executing the following in the command line:
```sh
pip install gr-nlp-toolkit
```

## Usage

### Available Processors

To use the toolkit first initialize a Pipeline specifying which processors you need. Each processor 
annotates the text with a specific task's annotations.

- To obtain Part-of-Speech and Morphological Tagging annotations add the `pos` processor
- To obtain Named Entity Recognition annotations add the `ner` processor
- To obtain Dependency Parsing annotations add the `dp` processor
- To enable the transliteration from Greeklish to Greek add the `g2g` processor or the `g2g_lite` processor for a lighter but less accurate model
  (Greeklish to Greek transliteration example : Thessalonikh -> Θεσσαλονίκη)

### Example Usage Scenarios

- Greeklish to Greek Conversion
```python
from gr_nlp_toolkit import Pipeline
nlp  = Pipeline("g2g")  Use ner,pos,dp and g2g processors

doc = nlp("O Volos kai h Larisa einai sthn Thessalia")
print(doc.text)
```

- DP, POS, NER processors
```python
nlp = Pipeline("pos,ner,dp")  # Use pos, ner, and dp processors
doc = nlp("Η Ιταλία κέρδισε την Αγγλία στον τελικό του Euro 2020.")

for token in doc.tokens:
  print(token.text) # the text of the token
  
  print(token.ner) # the named entity label in IOBES encoding : str
  
  print(token.upos) # the UPOS tag of the token
  print(token.feats) # the morphological features for the token
  
  print(token.head) # the head of the token
  print(token.deprel) # the dependency relation between the current token and its head
```


The first time you use a processor, the models are downloaded from Hugging Face and stored into the .cache folder. The NER, DP and POS processors are each about 500 MB, while the G2G processor is about 1.2 G in size.


## Generating the annotations

After creating the pipeline you can annotate a text by calling the pipeline's `__call__` method.

```python
doc = nlp('Η Ιταλία κέρδισε την Αγγλία στον τελικό του Euro 2020')
```
A `Document` object is then created and is annotated. The original text is tokenized 
and split to tokens

## Accessing the annotations

The following code explains how you can access the annotations generated by the toolkit.

```python
for token in doc.tokens:
  print(token.text) # the text of the token
  
  print(token.ner) # the named entity label in IOBES encoding : str
  
  print(token.upos) # the UPOS tag of the token
  print(token.feats) # the morphological features for the token
  
  print(token.head) # the head of the token
  print(token.deprel) # the dependency relation between the current token and its head
```

`token.ner` is set by the `ner` processor, `token.upos` and `token.feats` are set by the `pos` processor
and `token.head` and `token.deprel` are set by the `dp` processor.

A small detail is that to get the `Token` object that is the head of another token you need to access
`doc.tokens[head-1]`. The reason for this is that the enumeration of the tokens starts from 1 and when the
field `token.head` is set to 0, that means the token is the root of the word.

## Hugging Face repositories

## References
C. Dikonimaki, "A Transformer-based natural language processing toolkit for Greek -- Part of speech tagging and dependency parsing", BSc thesis, Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business, 2021. http://nlp.cs.aueb.gr/theses/dikonimaki_bsc_thesis.pdf

N. Smyrnioudis, "A Transformer-based natural language processing toolkit for Greek -- Named entity recognition and multi-task learning", BSc thesis, Department of Informatics, Athens University of Economics and Business, 2021. http://nlp.cs.aueb.gr/theses/smyrnioudis_bsc_thesis.pdf

Toumazatos, A., Pavlopoulos, J., Androutsopoulos, I., & Vassos, S. (2024). Still All Greeklish to Me: Greeklish to Greek Transliteration. In Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024) (pp. 15309–15319). ELRA and ICCL.

